---
layout: post
title: "Deterministically debugging concurrent GC bugs with rr"
date: 2019-04-28 00:00:00
categories: [OCaml, multicore, rr]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

[Multicore OCaml](https://github.com/ocaml-multicore/ocaml-multicore) comes with
a [concurrent garbage
collector](http://kcsrk.info/multicore/gc/2017/07/06/multicore-ocaml-gc/), where
the garbage collector and the mutator threads run concurrently. Debugging
concurrent GC bugs has been the most frustrating / satisfying (when fixed) part
of Multicore OCaml development. [rr](https://rr-project.org/), a record and
replay tool has made debugging concurrent GC bugs a sustainable exercise. In
this short post, I'll describe why.  

<!--more-->

A particularly tricky concurrent GC bug is one which occurs once every 10 to 100
runs due to non-determinism and any attempt to instrument the program to isolate
the bug (simplifying the program, adding print statements, etc.) makes it
disappear. The bug may only appear relatively late in the program run -- after a
few major GC cycles, where the program might have allocated 10s of gigabytes of
memory by then. The bug usually manifests as a segfault due to illegal memory
access, but the source of the bug may lie in the previous GC cycle and perhaps
due to actions of a different thread than the one that is throwing up the error.
`gdb` often doesn't help since finding the illegal memory access may not give
any clue as to _when_ the heap was corrupted. 

`rr` to the rescue. `rr` is an enhancement over `gdb` with support for recording
an execution and debugging in _reverse_. Once a failing execution is recorded,
the execution can be replayed multiple times deterministically. This removes the
non-determinism from debugging session. `gdb` does support record and replay,
but not on multi-threaded targets. 

The fact that the program can be run in reverse is the key for debugging heap
corruptions. An illegal access typically appears as a load or store to a illegal
memory address obtained from a heap object. When such an illegal access is
found, I set a hardware watchpoint on the heap address containing the illegal
address and continue the program in reverse. `rr` runs the program in reverse until
the write that stored the illegal address in the heap object! Usually, several
transitive reverse runs are necessary to get to the source of the bug, but this
is just mechanics.

While `rr` supports multi-threaded programs, it runs every thread on the same
core. This usually makes the bug disappear. Luckily, `rr` comes with support for
forcing a context switch after a certain number of CPU ticks (measured in terms
of the number of retired conditional branches). Even with this option, you will
need many runs before `rr` comes across a buggy execution. So I use the
following command:

```
for i in {1..10000}; do rr -c 10000 <program> <args>; if (( $? == 0 )); then echo "done $i"; else break; fi; done
```

which runs `<prog> <args>` under `rr` where a thread is allowed to execute for a
maximum of 10,000 ticks before a context switch. `rr` runs are repeated until a
crash is found or 10,000 `rr` runs are successfully completed. Depending on the
program being debugged, I leave it running overnight. If `rr` had in fact found
a crash, I can perform replay debugging with `rr replay` the following morning
and have a deterministic and reversible recorded execution to work with. 

`rr` has save countless hours in the development of Multicore OCaml, and `rr`
should be a essential tool in every GC hacker's toolbox. 
