---
layout: post
title: "Multicore OCaml Jobs"
date: 2019-09-16 11:59:00
categories: [OCaml, Multicore, Job]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Multiple **Research Software Engineer** positions are available in the
[Department of Computer Science and Engineering](https://www.cse.iitm.ac.in/) at
the [Indian Institute of Technology, Madras](https://www.iitm.ac.in/) to develop
[Multicore OCaml](https://github.com/ocaml-multicore/ocaml-multicore) and enable
[Tezos](https://tezos.com/) ecosystem to benefit from Multicore OCaml.

<!--more-->

## Background

The Multicore OCaml project aims to add native support for scalable concurrency
and shared memory parallelism in OCaml. At its core, Multicore OCaml extends the
OCaml programming language with effect handlers for expressing scalable
concurrency and a high-performance concurrent garbage collector aimed at
responsive networked applications. Multicore OCaml is also the first
industrial-strength language to come equipped with an efficient yet modular
memory model, allowing high-level local program reasoning while retaining
performance. Multicore OCaml is actively being developed and core features are
being upstreamed to OCaml.

Tezos is an open-source smart contract platform for decentralized applications
and assets. Tezos uses a self-amending cryptographic ledger - It achieves
consensus not just about the state of a ledger, but about the state of its own
protocol. The primary protocol of Tezos utilizes proof of stake and supports
Turing complete smart contracts in a domain-specific language called Michelson.
Tezos codebase is written in OCaml and extensively uses OCaml ecosystem
libraries and tools such as Lwt, OPAM, and Irmin.

## Roles

There are two roles:

* **Compiler Engineer:** Runtime system improvements to the OCaml programming
  language in order to make it compatible with multicore support. Implementing
  new features in Multicore OCaml compiler.
* **Application Engineer:** Developing core OCaml libraries that take advantage
  of multicore support. Adding parallelism support for Tezos ecosystem libraries
  and tools such as Lwt, Irmin, and dune.

### Positions

The positions available are:

| Role | Minimum Qualification | Pay Range (Per Month) |
|------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Project Engineer | BE / BTech / Master’s in Science/MCA or equivalent | Rs.21,500 to Rs.75,000 |
| Senior Project Engineer | ME / MTech (or) BE / BTech / Master’s in Science / MCA or equivalent with 2 years experience | Rs.27,500 to Rs.1,00,000 |
| Senior Project Officer / Post-doctoral Researcher | Ph.D. in Engineering or Sciences (or) ME / MTech with 3 years experience (or) BE / BTech / Master’s in Science / MCA or equivalent with 5 years experience | Rs.35,000 to Rs.1,50,000 |
| Principal Project Officer | Ph.D. in Engineering or Sciences with 7 years experience (or) ME / MTech with 10 years experience (or) BE / BTech / Master’s in Science / MCA or equivalent with 12 years experience | Rs. 48,000 to Rs.2,25,000 |

The appointment will be made for 6 months initially and can be extended up to 2
years. The project engineers have the option of enrolling in the MS program at
CSE, IIT Madras after 6 months. Such candidates may appear to the interview
directly, without having to write GATE.

You will work closely with the [OCaml Labs group](http://ocamllabs.io/),
University of Cambridge, UK and [Tarides](https://tarides.com/), France. All of
the work done will be made available as liberally licensed open-source software.

## Skills

### Compiler Engineer

#### Necessary:
* Excellent working knowledge of C, concurrent and parallel programming
* Knowledge of compilers (not necessarily of functional programming languages),
  operating systems, x86 & ARM assembly programming

#### Desired:
* Experience developing and/or maintaining performant software systems
* Experience with a functional programming language such as Haskell, OCaml,
  Scala, Scheme, Elm, or Elixir.
* Track record of open source contributions.
* Understanding of benchmarking techniques and analyzing results

### Applications Engineer

#### Necessary

* Excellent working knowledge of operating systems, concurrent and parallel
  programming
* Experience with a functional programming language such as Haskell, OCaml,
  Scala, Scheme, Elm, or Elixir.

#### Desired

* Track record of contributions to large open-source software systems
* Understanding of benchmarking techniques and analyzing results

## Apply

Write to `kcsrk@iitm.ac.in` with the subject “IITM Multicore OCaml 2019:
Compiler Engineer” or “IITM Multicore OCaml 2019: Application Engineer” based on
the role to express interest. Please include: 

1. Curriculum Vitae 
2. A summary of your experience in relevant technologies and software
3. Any open source contributions
