---
layout: post
title: "Foundations for hacking on OCaml"
date: 2025-11-10 10:35
categories: [OCaml]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

How do you acquire the fundamental computer skills to hack on a complex
systems project like OCaml? What's missing and how do you go about
bridging the gap?

<!--more-->

There are many fundamental systems skills that go into working on a
language like OCaml that only come with soaking in systems programming. By
systems programming, I mean the ability to use tools like the command-line,
editors, version control, build systems, compilers, debuggers, bash scripting,
and so on.  This is often something that one takes for granted when working on
such projects, but is often inscrutable for new contributors, who may not have
had the opportunity to develop these skills.

I struggle with this in my own research group. Students approach me to work on
the OCaml compiler because they have studied OS, Compilers and Computer
Architecture in class. But once they understand that working on OCaml involves
actually hacking on systems, they are often lost. How do you build the compiler
from source? How do you manage your changes? Do I have to build the entire
compiler if I make a small change in the runtime system? The compiler crashes
with a segfault -- how do I debug it? Worse, the students do not even know what
questions to ask, and come back with "This is all new to me, I don't know where
to begin. ChatGPT doesn't help."

The CS education in India often lacks a focus on these practical systems skills,
which can make it challenging for new contributors to get involved in systems
programming.  Looking at my own past, my undergraduate CS education, like many
others in India (and potentially elsewhere), had mandatory OS and Compiler
Construction courses. But neither had a dedicated lab component. It is natural
that these theoretical courses do not prepare the students for the practical
aspects of systems programming.

I was privileged to have a computer at my school, an IBM PC AT Model 5170,
and surprisingly had an education where I did some programming from a very young
age. There was lots of BASIC programming but also just tinkering with the
system, learning how to use DOS, and later Windows 3.1, 95, and so on. This
early exposure to computers and systems programming gave me a head start. Many
students, especially those from less privileged backgrounds, do not have this
early exposure. They may have learned some programming, but not had the time to
tinker with systems for extended periods of time.

This challenge of bridging the gap between theoretical CS education and
practical systems programming skills is a common one faced by professors working
in the broad systems area. The problem is compounded by the fact that these
skills are difficult to teach in a traditional classroom setting—they require
hands-on experience, experimentation, and often many hours of frustration and
debugging. These are skills that come from doing, not just from reading or
watching lectures. I would be curious to hear from others about their
experiences and how they have addressed this challenge.

That said, there are resources available online that can help new contributors
acquire these skills. This list is biased to the areas of the compiler that I
work on. I mainly work on the backend and the runtime system. The only reason I
usually touch the frontend is to lower the features that I care about to the
backend. Here are some I have found useful for working on the OCaml compiler:


* Systems programming
  + [Course: MIT Missing Semester](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/): This is a
    fantastic resource that covers a wide range of topics related to systems
    programming, including command-line tools, version control, editors, and
    more. The course is available online for free and includes video lectures,
    notes, and exercises. I encourage you to read the [motivation for this
    course](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/motivation.html).
  + [Course: Stanford CS45](https://cs45.stanford.edu/): CS45 is an extended version
    of the MIT course, and delves into the topics in more detail.
  + [CppCon 2015: Greg Law " Give me 15 minutes & I'll change your view of
    GDB"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PorfLSr3DDI): The talk explores GDB's
    less-known features and sheds light on some advanced debugging techniques.
  + [Tool: rr - Lightweight Recording and Deterministic Debugging](https://rr-project.org/):
    rr is a powerful tool for recording and replaying program execution, which
    can be invaluable for debugging complex issues in systems programming. I've
    stopped using `gdb` directly for anything non-trivial and have switched to
    `rr`.
* OCaml
  + [Course: CS3100 Paradigms of Programming](https://github.com/kayceesrk/cs3100_m20):
    The course covers a significant chunk of the OCaml language. You should be able
    to self-study the course to get a good understanding of the language. That said,
    the course deliberately does not cover the build system (dune), package manager
    (opam), command-line tools for the compiler (ocamlc, ocamlopt), editor
    integration (merlin, ocaml-lsp, ocamlformat), etc.
  + [Book: Real World OCaml](https://realworldocaml.org/): The book has a section on the
    compiler and the runtime system, which gives a great overview of the memory
    representation, garbage collection, and other aspects of the runtime system.
* Diving deeper
  + [Book: Systems Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud, 2nd Edition](https://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2020-07-15/systems-performance-2nd-edition.html)
    This book provides an in-depth look at systems performance, covering topics
    such as CPU architecture, memory hierarchy, storage systems, and networking.
    It is a valuable resource for understanding the underlying principles of
    systems programming and performance optimization.
  + [Book: The Garbage Collection Handbook](https://gchandbook.org/): This book
    offers a comprehensive overview of garbage collection techniques, algorithms,
    and implementations. It is an essential resource for understanding memory
    management in programming languages like OCaml.
  + [Book: The Art of Multiprocessor Programming](https://www.elsevier.com/books/the-art-of-multiprocessor-programming/herlihy/978-0-12-397337-5):
    This book provides a deep dive into concurrent programming and
    synchronization techniques, which are crucial for understanding
    multi-threaded runtime systems like OCaml 5's multicore runtime and the
    programming model.

<p> </p>

I will probably keep editing this post as I find more resources. If you have
suggestions for other useful resources or experiences to share, please feel free
to reach out to me.
